# Day 7

## Recursion

This one was tricky, and it seems as if the use of an interpreted language such as bash and the pitfalls that come with it are starting to catch up. The theory behind this puzzle was simple enough once understood, and it was not too tricky to devise a plan once I understood the instructions. However it still took me a good 10 minutes or so to wrap my head around what the puzzle was asking, and what I would have to do to accomplish this.

The main concept employed in day 7's puzzles  was *recursion*, a process that I have found to be easy enough to understand in theory, but tricky to apply in practice. Simply put, recursion is the concept of a function looping through a process that calls on itself until a condition is met. 

It may be easiest to think of recursion in terms of a filetree. In fact to those familiar with unix/linux, the concept of recursion is almost synonymous with applying a function to a directory, as can be seen with the ubiquitous `-r` flag that implies recursion.

A simple example of recursion is searching for a file within a filetree. A function could be defined called *search* that is passed an argument of the path to search.

In basic pseudocode:
```c
search(filename_to_search, path_to_search){
	for(loop through files){
		if(is a file && this_filename==filename){
			return path
		} 
		else if(is a directory){
			search(filename, path_to_directory)
		} 
	}
	return false
}
```

This function would loop through all the children contained within a directory and check whether each was either a file or a directory. If the current element was a file, the function checks whether the filename is equal to the search term, and return the path if this condition was met. 

Alternatively, if the element within the directory is a directory itself, the search function would call itself, passing the child directory's path as an argument. The search function would repeat within this child directory and within any further grandchild to great-grandchild to the nth generation  of directories until either the file is found and the path is returned or the loop called in the working directory completes and the function returns false.

This process of the search function calling itself until a either a condition is met, or a dead end is hit is recursion.

## Part one

### Version 1
Once I had decided to employ the concept of recursion in this puzzle, I began by trying to verbalise how the process would run to be able to break the process into manageable chunks. This is a good habit to pick up when you are new to programming, and it is one that becomes second nature and subconscious as you gain more experience. When I began to learn to code (in C), it was often helpful to literally write out how I expected to address the problem at hand

In pseudo-code the outline of this process is as follows:
- Create an array called search which initially contains the target to find (shiny gold).
	- This is analogous to the "filename_to_search" argument shown in the search function discussed earlier.
- Loop through the lines of the input file
- Create a regex string that matches lines that have the search term (shiny gold) in a position after the word "contain", and match lines using **grep**

```bash
#!/bin/bash

search=("shiny gold")
nLines=$(awk -F"\n" -v RS= '{print NF}' input)
for i in $(seq 1 $nLines); do lines+=("$i"); done
level=1; count=0; greps=0;
recurse(){
	in=("$@")
	unset search
	for i in ${!in[@]}; do
		for j in ${!lines[@]}; do
			index=$((j + 1))
			line=$(sed -n "$index"p input)
			echo $line | grep -E "^.*contain.*${in[$i]}" > /dev/null &&
				{ 
					container=$(echo $line | sed 's/ bags contain.*$//')
					search+=("$container")
					unset lines[$j]
					let count+=1
				}
			let greps+=1
		done
	done
}
while [ ${#search[@]} -gt 0 ]; do
	echo Searching level $level...
	recurse "${search[@]}"
	let level+=1
done
echo $count
echo "grep called: $greps times"
```

<br>

#### Line by Line

```bash
search=("shiny gold")
```
The search array is initialised with the search term shiny gold. Simple enough

```bash
nLines=$(awk -F"\n" -v RS= '{print NF}' input)
```
This is an `awk` command that returns the number of lines in the input file. 

- `-F"\n"` sets the field separator to the newline character, essentially this means that `awk` will split the input file by line
- `-v RS= ` sets the row separator to empty. This runs `awk` in a mode that treats the input as one large row rather than rows separated by newlines. Using this syntax, `-v` is needed to tell `awk` that `RS` is a variable to use in the command.
- `'{print NF}'`tells `awk` to print the number of fields (*ie the number of lines*).
- `input` simply means use the puzzle input file as the source
- The line could be rewritten as `awk 'BEGIN{FS="\n"}{RS=""}{print NF}'`, but I much prefer declaring variables using the `-v` syntax.
- The number of lines is stored in the variable `$nLines`

This is different to how I have performed this task on previous days (`cat input | wc -l`) but I want to reduce the number of pipes I use and get more fluent with `awk`.

```
for i in $(seq 1 $nLines); do lines+=("$i"); done
```
This line creates an array which contains the numbers 1 through `$nLines`. The reason for this will become (hopefully) clearer soon.

```
level=1; count=0;
```
This initialises the variables `$level` and `$count`. Again simple enough.

##### The Recurse Function


##### The Condition
```
while [ ${#search[@]} -gt 0 ]; do
	echo Searching level $level...
	recurse "${search[@]}"
	let level+=1
done
```
This is how the recursion was controlled. The while loop sets up the condition that recursion will be repeatedly called, passing an array of search terms until no results are output.
In general terms this means that the func

```bash
while [ ${#search[@]} -gt 0 ]; do
```
- This line evaluates to true if the search terms array is not empty and false if it is empty. The condition is rechecked each time the recursion function completes
- As this is a `while` iteration, the loop will continue (indefinitely if needs be) until the recurse function outputs no results

`${#search[@]}` is simply the length of the search terms array and `-gt 0` means "greater than 0".
- It may be a bit confusing to think of the search array as both input and output, but it is written this way to allow recursion. The recurse function takes the search terms as input, empties the search array, runs and fills the search
- In fact if you consider how recursion works, the output ***is*** the input for the next iteration of the function.

- `recurse "${search[@]}"`
	- This calls the recurse function, passing the entirety of the search terms as an argument
	-


```bash
recurse(){
	in=("$@")
	unset search
	for i in ${!in[@]}; do
		for j in ${!lines[@]}; do
			index=$((j + 1))
			line=$(sed -n "$index"p input)
			echo $line | grep -E "^.*contain.*${in[$i]}" > /dev/null &&
				{ 
					container=$(echo $line | sed 's/ bags contain.*$//')
					search+=("$container")
					unset lines[$j]
					let count+=1
				}
			let greps+=1
		done
	done
}
```



in=("$@")
```

```
unset search
	```

	```
	for i in ${!in[@]}; do
	```

	```
		for j in ${!lines[@]}; do
		```

		```
			index=$((j + 1))
			```

			```
			line=$(sed -n "$index"p input)
			```

			```
			echo $line | grep -E "^.*contain.*${in[$i]}" > /dev/null &&
			```

			```
				{ 
				```

				```
					container=$(echo $line | sed 's/ bags contain.*$//')
					```

					```
					search+=("$container")
					```

					```
					unset lines[$j]
					```

					```
					let count+=1
					```

					```
				}
				```

				```
			let greps+=1
			```

			```
		done
		```

		```
	done
	```


```
while [ ${#search[@]} -gt 0 ]; do
```

```
	echo Searching level $level...
	```

	```
	recurse "${search[@]}"
	```

	```
	let level+=1
	```

	```
```

echo $count
```

```
echo "grep called: $greps times"
```





#### Thoughts
This returned the correct answer of 112. However the run time was nearly 10 minutes! In total, **grep** was called nearly 60,000 times, so I began to rethink the process and decide whether there was a better way of doing things. In my experience, there is almost always a better or more efficient way of completing a task, and one of the reasons I have decided to attempt this challenge of completing advent of code in a scripting language such as **bash** is to get better at writing more efficient code.
I counted the number of times **grep** was called by adding a counter variable to the 
In total **grep** was called nearly 60,000 times within the 10 minute block. 

This is excessive - there must be a better way of doing things...




### Version 2

I soon realised that 

