# Progress

Things are definitely getting tricky now. Some of the limitations of using a programming language such as bash (that for example does not support associative arrays in all versions in common use) are starting to surface. However, I love a challenge and am too stubborn to cave in to using something more accessible. 

Bash is great at what it does - scripts. There is a lot of debate online about whether it even *is* a programming language, but this is semantics and not worth spending too much time worrying about in my opinion. I've read the Wikipedia page on "Turing Completeness" but thats probably about where my interest ends. I'm happy to leave these topics to those who know a lot more about programming than me, and to those who potentially know a little less but like to bore people at dinner parties.

Ther are definitely some features ubiquitous in almost all popular programming languages that would have been useful iin a task such as this that do not have support in bash (OOP support comes to mind). Bash does not *even* implement multidimensional arrays, but despite this, I really enjoyed this puzzle especially because I had to think very creatively about how to use tools at hand and without relying on the cruxes of current modern languages. I truly believe that these sort of limitations lead to becoming a better, more well rounded programmer.

As mentioned earlier, bash did not add support for associative arrays until version 4.x, and because many people are using a version of bash lower than this (those on Mac OS X, if you're stuck indoors on a rainy day with nothing to do, invite all your friends over and run `bash --version` for hours of fun), I felt reluctant to use these. However using associative arrays in a task like this would not be my go to solution in a more kitted out programming language, so I still had to take a moment to think about how to utilise these. At the end of the day bash does support associative arrays, so ultimately I feel theres no shame in using them.

In the end I think  I must have tried at least 5 different approaches to this puzzle before hitting a period where I was commenting and uncommenting everything, changing the colour of ansi escape codes of ouput, pasting code here and there (probably at random), changing, tweaking, renaming to 7.2.rewrite.finalversion2--out-final etc etc before opening a blank doc in vim and tried to rethink my strategy (I think staring at the words `#!/bin/bash` is now my equivalent to the "opening a word document and writing the title after 9 hours so you reward yourself with a nap" meme). As I mentioned in the 7.1 writeup, I find recursive tasks a bit boggling, and I often found myself running down too many rabbit holes and ended up getting frustrated. 

I finally accepted that as long as I got to the correct answer before I retire, and I could run the code without my CPU heat solving nuclear fission I could eventually learn to live with myself... I probably will come back to this soon when the word "bag" has regained its meaning and I fancy having a rough time.

Despite the frustration, I feel like this puzzle has made me appreciate bash so much more, and has refined my knowledge just that bit more in the process. I am becoming a bit nervous about what else could be in store over the next 20 or so days but I'm happy to accept that I probably just missed something obvious in my approach...

Anyway, enough waffling, lets get into it.

## The strategy
I could go through all the strategies I tried in the process, but you probably do not want to read them and somethings are better left unsaid. I think one of them involved running from the root node, through branches, hitting a dead end, returning back up the branch counting on the way, and then continuing back down the branch if there were unindexed directories or to the next br.... ugh PTSD

>Note: In hindsight I think this approach would actually work out fine if I could be bothered to code it, but I think it would be a headache, and life is too short (see earlier paragraphs on accepting a correct answer when it arrives).

In summary the strategy was as follows:
- Create a recursive function that takes an array of input bag values, loops through them and searches through the input file to find output bag values and quantities
- These values are parsed into an associative array as the function recursively loops through the bags
- Once all bags are indexed, a counting function runs back through the brances


```bash
#!/bin/bash

#inputfile="puzzletest"
inputfile="input"
tot=0; num=1; level=1
declare -A bagLevels

recurse(){
	in=("$@")
	unset search
	unset nums; unset bags; nums=(); bags=()
	for lpInpArr in ${!in[@]}; do
		if grep "^${in[$lpInpArr]}.*no other" "$inputfile" > /dev/null; then
			echo "${in[$lpInpArr]} is empty!"
			bagLevels[${in[$lpInpArr]}]="is empty"
		else
			line=$(grep "^${in[$lpInpArr]}.*contain" "$inputfile")
			tot=$(echo $line | sed -E 's/[^0-9,]//g; s/,/+/g' | bc)
			IFS=";" read -rd '' -a children<<<$(echo $line | 
				sed -E 's/^.*contain (.*)\.$/\1/g; s/, /;/g')
			for i in ${!children[@]}; do
				nums+=("$(echo ${children[$i]} | sed -E 's/[^0-9]*//g')")
				bags+=("$(echo ${children[$i]} | sed -E 's/^[0-9]* (.*) bags?$/\1/')")
			done
			echo "${in[$lpInpArr]} contains $tot bags:"
			for j in ${!bags[@]}; do
				echo "- ${nums[$j]} : ${bags[$j]}: parent ${in[$lpInpArr]}"
				bag=${bags[$j]}
				search+=("${bags[$j]}")
				bagLevels["${bags[$j]}"]="${nums[$j]} in ${in[$lpInpArr]}"
			done
		fi
	done
}
search=("shiny gold")
recurse "${search[@]}"
recurse "${search[@]}"
recurse "${search[@]}"

#Print all archived bags
for key in "${!bagLevels[@]}"; do
	echo $key: ${bagLevels[$key]}
done
```




### For each loop of recursion
- a bag name is fed in and the quantity in the parent bag 
	- To begin with this input is "shiny gold" 
- The function check whehter the bag has any bags within it
- If it does
	- A list of its content bags is made
	- \a
	- 


Function - getNumberofBags

In basic, this function takes a bag name in, and returns the number of bags held within it ;u

To begin with, the number of
