# Day 8a
###### Topics
- `while`
- `sed`
- `regex`
- `case`
- `wildcards`
- `bc`

```bash
#!/bin/bash

index=1; acc=0; ran=()
while [ "${ran[$index]}" != true ]; do
	ran[$index]=true
	line=$(sed -n "$index"p  input)
	x=$(echo "$line" | sed -E 's/^[^-^+^0-9]*//g')
	case $line in 
		nop*) let index+=1;;
		acc*) let index+=1; acc=$(echo "$acc$x" | bc);;
		jmp*) index=$(echo "$index$x" | bc);; 
	esac
done

echo $acc
```

## Intro
Part one of day 8 was a welcome change in terms of simplicity comparative to the general pains of 7b. In fact, Part one was almost *too* simple - I definitely ended up second guessing myself a fair bit before submitting my answer as I felt that I could be missing something. 

The user is given an input file that contains a list of commands that are to be executed. The order is not linear however, and the next line to read the command from is referenced in the parent command by either a positive or negative signed number. There is also an accumlator counter that is incremented by values indicated in the commands.

There are three commands
- jmp ± x: jump to the line x away in the direction indicated by the prefix sign
- acc ± x: increment/decrement the accumulator variable by x
- nop ± x: an empty command, ignore x and move to the next line

The puzzle outlines that the user's input file is corrupted, and instead of running through the commands the program enters an infinite loop. It helpfully states that code that will eventually enter an infinite loop can be recognised by a loop that runs any line more than once. 

Therefore the puzzle requires the user to stop at the first incidence of a line which has already been run 

## The Code
Devising a strategy for the problem wasnt too difficult, my initial throught proccess looked something like:

1. Create a variable to store the current line number called index. This is initialised as 1 as the user starts on the first line of the input file. Using this number, we can use `sed` to grab the line of file that contains the next command to run
2. Add the current line number to an array called `ran` using the line
   number as the index of the array.
3. Load the line at `$index` into a variable called `$line` and parse this to decipher what action to take next. 
4. Create a case statement that takes the action input and runs code depending on what to do next
	- `nop`: increase the index by one
	- `acc`: increase the index by one and inc/dec the accumulator variable by x
	- `jmp`: inc/dec the index by x
5. Wrap this all in a while loop to continue iterations until a line that has previously been run is reached. 
6. Return the accumulator variable

### While Loops
This process of continuing a loop of code an unknown amount of times until a condition is met is a textbook use case of a **while loop**. In pseudo-code, we can conecptualise what the code will do:
```bash
while [ #the current line has not been run ]; do
	#Do code
done
```
We are making use of an array to store the line numbers of the commands already run. When we start the code, no commands have yet been called, so the array is empty. We know that we start at line 1.

The first step in the while loop is to store the current line number. We can then update the condition of the while loop to reference this array

```bash
$index=1; $acc=0; ran=()
while [ #the current line has not been run ]; do
	ran[$index]=true
done
echo $acc
```

The basis of this while loop is to repeat iterations until we hit an index that has already been run and is therefore in the `run` array at position `$index`. We input a command's index and if it is original, we continue iterations. Therefore we can update the condition of the while loop:

```bash
$index=1; $acc=0; ran=()
while [ "${ran[$index]}" != true ]; do
	ran[$index]=true
done
echo $acc
```
Running this code as it currently stands would result in infinite iterations of the loop. This is because our run array is defaulted to empty, and therefore run[1] is empty. However this is not a problem as we know that the index will eventually be altered by the three commands.

Lets write some comments within our while loop to indicate what needs to be coded next:

```bash
$index=1; $acc=0; ran=()
while [ "${ran[$index]}" != true ]; do
	ran[$index]=true
	#Get and store the line at position $index
	#Parse the command
	#Run the command and update index/accumulator
	#Continue until the index exists in ran[]
done
echo $acc
```

### Get and store the input line

Next we need to actually load the line of the input file at position `$index`. This is a perfect use case of `sed`. We need to store the line into a variable so that we can decipher what to do next. This is coded as 

```bash
line=$(sed -n "$index"p input)
```

- `-n` denotes to not print the whole file
- `"$index"p` is the line number to get. `p` means print only this line
	- Here the double quotes are important as we want to expand the `$index` variable to its value
- `input` indicates the file to get lines from (our puzzle input)

### Parse the current line

The next step is to parse input line to actually execute the command they indicate. We know there are three different commands at the very start of the line followed by a space, followed by ± followed by an integer.

It is completely reasonable to now split the line into two variables: one containing the command itself, and one containing the quantifier and possibly a third to store the direction. However, we can group the direction with the quantifier itself.

Additionally we can use something called wildcard matching further down in the next step of code to actually grab the command itself from the line wihtout storing it in a variable - bare with me on this. 

We therefore need to only parse the quantifier. We can use `sed` substitution using a regular expression to remove any characters that are not either a digit or a sign:

```bash
x=$(echo "$line" | sed -E 's/^[^-^+^0-9]*//g')
```
- First we feed the input of the `sed` substitution by `echoing` our line and piping it to `sed`
- We then use `sed -E 's/'` to indicate that we are performing a substitution (`s/`) using a regular expression (`-E`).
	- Note that I tend to use -E rather that -e by default now, indicating to use the extended flavour of regular expressions.
	- This may be less efficient but it saves learning what features are and aren't supported in `sed's` default regex flavour.

Next comes the scary looking regular expression. Don't panic, once broekn down into its constituent parts it is actually fairly simple.

>**Side note:** Regular expressions are perhaps *the* most useful tool a programmer can have in their arsenal when manipulating text. Yes, the syntax can be intimidating, but once you understand the basics they are in fact very intuitive and profoundly poweful. A brilliant reference is the Riley book "Mastering Regular Expressions" by Jeffery Friedl.
>>**Side side note:** debugging regex is rough. It is a language that is much easier to write than it is to read in my experience.

Recall that the syntax for `sed` substitions is

```bash
sed 's/$match/$replace with/$flags'
```

As we want to keep the only the sign + the quantifier and delete the rest of the line, we can want to match any character that isn't a digit or a +/- character and delete it (replace it with nothing).

Before crafting the regular expression, we know that we need to use the `g` (denoting global) flag to replace all matches, and leave the replace with field blank:

```bash
sed 's/$match//g'
```

Now comes the regex. We want to match a group of characters in any order, so we contain these characters within square brackets. It is much quicker to write the characters we *don't* want to match by adding the `^` prefix. The syntax for this may be a little confusing. Note that `^` does not apply to all characters in the brackets, so it has to be written before each character or range.

Annoyingly `sed` does not support the use of `\d` to match and digit character, so wer use the range 0-9 instead. It is essential to put the - character at the start of the group, otherwise it needs to be escaped (this is because - in the middle of the group will be interepreted as indicating a range of characters)/

```bash
[^-^+^0-9]
```

We don't now how many characters we need to replace in each line so we add the `*` quantifier to the bracket to indicate any number of matches

```bash
[^-^+^0-9]*
```

Finally, as we want to start matching from the start of the line until the end of the line we surround our group with `^...$`

```bash
^[^-^+^0-9]*$
```

Now lets write out the whole command. We want to store the `stdout` of our substitution in the variable `x` which denotes the sign + quantifier.

```bash
x=$(echo "$line" | sed -E 's/^[^-^+^0-9]*//g')
```
>Remember that the syntax `$(...)` indicates **command substitution**. In simple terms it is equivalent to printing the `stdout` of the internal command as text surrounded by double quotes.

### Run the command

Earlier I mentioned that we did not need to perform a seperate `sed` substitution to parse the actual command within each line. This is because we are going to use a `case` statement that employs **wildcard matching**.

`case` is the shell equivalent of `switch` statments that you may be familiar with in other languages. Essentially it is short hand for compairng an input against a discrete list of possiblilities and running diffrenet code depending on which the input matches. 

You could emulate this with multiple `if/elseif` statements, but `case` is more simple to read and write.

The general syntax is as follows:
```bash
case "$input" in
	"input"==this) #Run this ;;
	or "input"==this) #Run this ;;
	...
	or "input"==this) #Run this ;;
	#Or if input does not match any of these
	*) #Run this ;;
esac
```
The beauty of the `case` statement is that you can use **wildcard** matching in each of the options. This is essentially a watered down regex, the kind of regex you could expect from a Wetherspoons or a Piers Morgan documentary. In this example we use the `*` wildcard, which indicates a string of any characters of any length.

Therefore we can create three options for our `case` statment:

1. `acc*`
2. `jmp*`
3. `nop*`

We know that each of our lines in the input file starts with either of these three options followed by any characters (`*`), so we do not need a `*)` catch all option. 

We now have the following code block:
```bash
case "$line" in 
	acc*) #Run code specific for the acc command ;;
	jmp*) #...jmp command ;;
	nop*) #...nop command ;;
esac
```
We now need to write code to tell our script what to do with each command.

#### The acc command

The acc command denotes that we need to increase our accumulator variable by the value idicated by `$x` and then move to the next line (increase `$index` by one). 
This is accomplished by the line:

```bash
acc*) let index+=1; acc=$(echo "$acc$x" | bc);;
```

`acc*)` is relevent to the contianing case statement. It indicates that lines will only be sent to the code after `)` if they start with the text `acc`

The run code of the case statement is split into two parts by `;` and closed by `;;`
1. The first portion simply adds 1 to `$index`

2. The second part is quite unorthodox, I love this line. Its so unorthodox that I expect to see teenage girls wearing T shirts soon with this line printed across it
- First the string `$acc$x` is echoed to `stdout`. But what does this mean?
	- Lets think about an example. Say that the value of `$acc` is 3, then lets say that we parsed our sign-quantifier variable as "+2". The string `"$acc$x"` is therefore expanded to the string "3+2" which is piped to `bc`
	- `bc` is a calculator program that accepts an arithmetic expression from `stdin`, calculates it and returns the result to `stdout`.

- In our example we pipe `3+2` to `bc` which calculates `5` and pipes this to `stdout`. We expand this and store it in `$acc` - nice.

#### The jmp command
The theory is exactly the same for the `acc` command, except we inc/dec the index this time. The accumulator is unchanged. Therefore:
```bash
jmp*) index=$(echo "$index$x" | bc);; 
```
#### The nop command
This command simply ignores x and moves to the next line of the file, therefore:
```bash
nop*) let index+=1;;
```

## Conclusion

```bash
#!/bin/bash
index=1; acc=0; ran=()
while [ "${ran[$index]}" != true ]; do
	ran[$index]=true
	line=$(sed -n "$index"p  input)
	x=$(echo "$line" | sed -E 's/^[^-^0-9^+]*//g')
	case $line in 
		nop*) let index+=1;;
		acc*) let index+=1; acc=$(echo "$acc$x" | bc);;
		jmp*) index=$(echo "$index$x" | bc); act=jmp;;
	esac
done
echo $acc
```
1. We start at the index 1 and enter the while loop
2. We set the ran array at index 1 to true to prevent this line of code being run twice
3. We get the line at index 1 and extract the quantifier using `regex`
4. We extract the command from the line and run code depending on this by use of a `case` statement.
5. We get a new value of index and finish the loop
6. The while loop checks if the element of the ran array at the new line index equals true and continues another iteration if not. 
7. If it does however the loop stops and the accumulator value is output

Because this was such a simple puzzle I decided to go into much more depth than usual in explaining the code. From first glance, part 2 looks a lot more complex so the write up may not necessarily be as in-depth.

We covered a good range of topics however so I really hope people find this useful. I even managed to get a dig in at Tim Martin (long may he rot in a post-Brexit, Covid dodging hell) along the way.

Stay tuned for part 2!

#### Stats
- Answer: 1521
- Runtime: 3.291s
- Linecount: 15 
