# Day 8b

Coming up with a frameork for this puzzle was a bit more tricky than for 8a. The most obvious way of doing things is to run the code, but at the first occurence of a jmp or a nop, you take the opposite action and see whether the code completes

If this works, we know that this was the problematic command. However i have a feeling that the first occurence of either jmp or nop is not going to ve the probklem ine. Using this method we would then start the code again but this time change the second occurence of either nop or jmp and continue.

Lets consider the maximum number of times we would have to run the code using this method by adding a counter for both nop and jmp to the code from 8a.

```bash
#!/bin/bash

index=1; acc=0; ran=()
nNop=0
nJmp=1
while [ "${ran[$index]}" != true ]; do
	ran[$index]=true
	line=$(sed -n "$index"p  input)
	x=$(echo "$line" | sed -E 's/^[^-^+^0-9]*//g')
	case $line in 
		nop*) let index+=1
			let nNop+=1;;
		acc*) let index+=1; acc=$(echo "$acc$x" | bc);;
		jmp*) index=$(echo "$index$x" | bc)
		 let nJmp+=1;;
	esac
done
echo Num of nops = $nNop
echo Num of jmps = $nJmp
echo Max commands to change = "$((nNop + nJmp))"
```
Here you can see I simply added the variables nNop and nJmp which are incrememted by 1 everry time either a nop or jmp command is run. These values are then returned at the end.
```bash
Num of nops = 33
Num of jmps = 72
Max commands to change = 105
```

In total we would therefore have to run our code at most 105 times in order to try changing all possible variables. This would mean a runtime of approximately 4 seconds x 105 = 420 seconds = 7 minutes.

This is a long time, so there must be a more elegant solution to try... However lets go with the most obvious solution first to get to an answer. I'm a firm believer in doing the obivous method first and later refining to improve efficiency rather than staring at a blank file.

## Strategy 1

### Brainstorming
Lets try and deconstruct what the puzzle is asking us to do, as the instructions are a little cryptic. The ultimate function of our code is to:

>**loop** through our routing code multiple times and in each iteration change **only one** `jmp` or `nop` command until we find a route that reaches the end of the input file.

Lets have a look at the outline for the logic structure I wrote for this puzzle:

```bash
while [ #code has not reached the end of the file ]; do
	#Run the code, changing the nth occurence of nop or jmp
	#Increase n by one
done
```

This while loop will eventually wrap around an altered version of the code form 8a that changes **only** the nth occurence of either `jmp` or `nop`.

We need to flesh out these ideas a bit more to get an overall structure for the control logic of our program. Lets break down the logic into steps.

1. We want to change **one and only one** command per iteration of our loop. Therefore we need to store a boolean variable that indicates whether we have already tried changing a command in the current loop. Each time we run through the loop we will reference this variable and either change the next occurence of `jmp` or `nop` that we havent yet tried changing or run the commands as they are. Lets store this condition in a variable called `$newRoute`.

2. Secondly, we need a method to store line numbers of `nop`/`jmp` commands we have already tried to change. Similar to part one we can use an array called `changed`. If `$newRoute` is false and we hit a `nop`/`jmp` command, we need to check the index of the current line number in the `changed` array. If the value at this index is true, we know that we have already tried changing this line in a previous unsuccessful loop, so we wait until the next occurence of `nop`/`jmp`

3. However if `$newRoute` is false and the value of `changed[$currentLineNumber]` is false, we know that this line is the next command to try changing. We now need to update our `$newRoute` and `${changed}` variables, swap `nop` to `jmp` or vice versa and continue down the new route until we either hit the end of the file or we hit a command we have already run previously and exit the current route

> *Side note:* If this is confusing, which it probably is, I recommend having a skim through the write up for 8a to refresh your memory on what the we did in the previous program. We are only adding functionality to our previous program, not changing it

### Structure
The following code builds on these ideas to show an overall structure for our new program:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

file="testinput"
changed=()

#Checkpoint 1
for i in {1..5}; do
	index=1; acc=0; ran=(); newRoute=false
	#Checkpoint 2
	while [ "${ran[$index]}" != true ]; do
		ran[$index]=true
		line=$(sed -n "$index"p  $file)
		printf "\t%s\n" "$line"
		x=$(echo "$line" | sed -E 's/^[^-^+^0-9]*//g')
		case $line in 
			nop*|jmp*)
				#Checkpoint 3
				if [ $newRoute == false ]; then
					#Checkpoint 4
					if [ "${changed[$index]}" != true ]; then
						#Checkpoint 5
						changed[$index]=true
						#Run code to swap the command's action
						newRoute=true
					else 
						#Checkpoint 6
					fi
				else
					#Checkpoint 7
				fi
				;;&
			nop*) 
				let index+=1
				;;
			acc*) 
				let index+=1
				acc=$(echo "$acc$x" | bc);;
			jmp*) 
				index=$(echo "$index$x" | bc)
				;;
		esac
	done
done
```

Don't panic, all this code represents is our orgiinal code form 8a with a modified case statement and the new `$newRoute` and `${changed}` variables we discussed earlier.

***Why is our code now wrapped in a for loop?*** 

Well, we need to run our routing code multiple times, and each time we need to change **exactly one** jmp or nop command. The number of times we need to loop our code is not known, so we actually need to eventually to wrap our code in a while loop, not a for loop, but this for loop makes things simpler for now - we will code the while wrapper later. 5 iterations of the router should be enough to get the desired answer from the example input given to us.

#### The new case statement
Lets discuss what is happening in our modified `case` statment. You may notice we now have a new first condition:
```bash
case $line in
	nop*|jmp*)
		...
		#Check and swap the commands if necessary
		...
		;;&
	#Original case options
		...
esac
```
What exactly is going on here? Well before we run any of the commands, we need a condition that catches both `nop` or `jmp` commands and either changes them or does not change them depending on our logic state.

This is accomplished with the condition `nop*|jmp*)` (`|` simply means or). The check and update code will be run between here and `;;&`. 

***But what does `;;&` mean?*** 

Well simply put, once we have run the code in this block, our input line will either be changed or unchanged. We then want to run the command contained in the line as if nothing has happenned. The `&` at the end of the block means that we want to continue in the case statement to execute our command.

This can be conceptualised as a short hand equiavlent of the following:
```bash
case $line in
	nop*) #Check and swap command to jmp if conditions met, store in newline;;
	jmp*) #Check and swap command to nop if conditions met, store in newline;;
esac
case $newline in
	nop*) #Run nop command;;
	acc*) #Run acc command;;
	jmp*) #Run jmp command;;
esac
```

